## Islandora Metadata Interest Group Agenda
### Monday, July 24, 2017, 1-2pm EST
### 
---
* Chair:  Amanda Lehman
* Notetaker:  Rachel Tillay

---

#### Join Us!
This meeting is a hybrid teleconference and IRC chat. Anyone is welcome to join. Here is the info:
* Time: 1:00pm Eastern Daylight Time US (UTC-4)
* Dial-in Number: (641) 715-3570
  * Participant Code: 304589#
  * International numbers: [[Conference Call Information]]
  * Web Access: https://www.freeconferencecallhd.com/wp-content/themes/responsive/flashphone/flash-phone.php
* IRC:
  * Join the #islandora chat room via [Freenode Web IRC](http://webchat.freenode.net/) (enter a unique nick)
  * Or point your IRC client to #islandora on irc.freenode.net
---
#### Attending:
* Rachel Tillay, Tulane University
* Johnny Chris, Boston College
* Lisa Conathan, Head of Special Collections, Williams College
* Amanda Lehman, University of Wyoming
* Aaron Coburn, from Amherst College
* Johanna Radding, Kate Gerrity, Este Pope here from Amherst College
* Audrey Lorberfeld from The New York Academy of Medicine Library
* Robin?
* Danny Lamb
* Bethany Seeger, Amherst
* Robin, The New York Academy of Medicine

#### Agenda:
* Welcome and introductions
     * Jennifer and Rosie send their regrets
* Last meetings [notes](https://github.com/islandora-interest-groups/Islandora-Metadata-Interest-Group/blob/master/Meetings/2017_07_10.md)
* Discussion: 
     * Homework Discussion: [RDF Primer](https://www.w3.org/TR/2014/NOTE-rdf11-primer-20140225) and [RDF Concepts](https://www.w3.org/TR/rdf11-concepts)
     * Most of the group hasn't finished reading the primers
     * Lead by Amherst College: (Aaron Coburn, Bethany Seeger, Sarah Walden McGowan, Johanna Radding) will discuss what they learned going from MODS to RDF.

#### Notes:
* Amanda Lehman mentioned an upcoming move from Islandora
     * University may be moving to another platform (possibly DSpace partnership with Colorado) because their developer has found a new position and it is no longer a realistic venture. Also considering a hosted Islandora. The group agrees that at least one developer is required for any institution attempting to host and manage their own Islandora instance.
* Aaron Coburn provided a background and context for Amherst's work migrating to linked data
     * Data models haven't changed in 5-6 years, despite having changed the software
     * Goals were developing another data model that would have a long life, through multiple changes of software
     * Description of Amherst staff participation in the process
     * Entire group decided to learn RDF to support this process
     * Began 2 years ago, but Fedora 3 is still being used in production
* Getting into Specifics
     * Generally speaking, developers desires a simple data model, while Metadata librarians will prefer specificity in data model
     * Example discussion is whether to include SubTitle--decision was to drop it
     * Not all of MODS is needed, because it isn't used, and some parts are being dropped
     * The goal isn't migrating MODS, the focus is migrating the objects and the required metadata
     * MODS is necessary as an end result for many of the metadata harvesters, so it has to be possible to re-create MODS from the RDF that is created
     * Structural metadata in RELS-EXT etc. is generally already RDF-ready
     * Other structural metadata imbedded in MODS had to be teased out
     * The most difficult aspects of migrating the fields was the descriptive metadata
     * Used RDF fields for MODS, not for core items, but for metadata necessary to recreate the MODS at a later point in the process
     * For both structural and descriptive metadata, "How much are our metadata models based on the implementation?"
     * How to handle blank nodes/child nodes/#uris as an example...consider the limitations of the software, but remember that Fedora is gradually becoming more general, so you don't want to develop a metadata model around the quirks of a particular system...this will allow you to more easily move between different implementations.
     * Named entities that aren't in a linked data thesaurus: How to model? Amherst is modeling subjects as SkosConcepts and are being put into a separate part of the repository. This is their recommendation for entities, names, locations, etc. that have to be created locally. This allows everything to be "flat" which makes the programming side easier.

#### Questions:
* "Flat" doesn't mean it can't be used for compound objects, each page and the top level all have their iri's, but the metadata is located at the lowest level, rather than some of the metadata that describes pages being included in a structured metadata system in the top level
* "Have you looked at how this meshes with EAD?" This hasn't specifically been addressed, but similarly to how there is a later process that transforms the RDF into MODS, this should be possible with EAD. However, the complexity of 12 potential levels in EAD could make this difficult...though it should be an arbitrary difference from 2 levels in comparison to 12. Recommendation to see what others who use EAD are doing.
* Danny Lamb: "FYI we're investigating using Twig templates to spit out whatever format you need a la https://github.com/mnylc/dcmny/blob/master/twig/mods_twig_base.html"
* "How are you bridging the gap between using both Fedora 3 and 4?" All of the work with Fedora 4 is in development. MODS XML will not be stored in Fedora 4.
* Bethany explained that the RDF will be transformed to MODS using a Python script. When Amherst begins the actual migration, the code will be published and shared.
* Jared Whiklo submitted this infomration about converting [EAD to RDF](http://blogs.sussex.ac.uk/salda/2011/05/16/the-data-transformation/)
* Advantage of the team all learning RDF includes informing the library, especially the library director, of what RDF is and how/why it is being used
* Recommended a wikidata webinar about how RDF is being used...was helpful in giving librarians an actual demonstration of the technology
* Not just programmer-driven, knowing RDF allowed the entire team to participate
* XSD date format? ISO dates? Knew what dates Amhert needed to represent, and settled on [EDTF](https://www.loc.gov/standards/datetime/) dates because this allowed for ranges and approximate dates. Knowing what kinds of literals you want to represent is important early in the process.
* RDF allows language tags (if you don't have a literal string), and there are different standards for this
* "How much clean-up are you doing on existing metadata?" Bethany: Didn't plan for this, but recommend including a systematic review and clean-up in the plan for those starting out. Most of the clean-up got done as they stumbled across areas like genre that needed clean-up.
* [Apache Standbol](https://stanbol.apache.org/) recommended by Aaron for possible clean-up for large sets of linked data, though it hasn't been used by Amherst yet.
* [OpenRefine](http://openrefine.org/) was also recommended, especially for MODSXML, if it is a set of reasonable size.

#### Group Business Notes:
* Homework will stay the same
* A place to share 2-5 MODS files will be created for us to contribute representative records for our collections
     * This will be an option for sharing use cases for necessary customizations as well.
* We will meet in 2 weeks--on August 7th.
* Some of the leadership in the group may be leaving, so consider this a preliminary call for openings.
* Next meeting may include leadership from Colorado College.
